Abstract (500 words)

Title- GRNsight v2: a web app for visualizing small gene regulatory networks

Authors - Eileen J. Choe, Nicole A. Anguiano, Anindita Varshneya, Mihir Samdarshi, Yeon-Soo Shin, Edward B. Bachoura, John David N. Dionisio, and Kam D. Dahlquist

In the domain of systems biology, an effective network visualization of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) allows users to leverage the power of visualization to derive insights from their modeling data. A GRN consists of genes, transcription factors, and the regulatory connections between them which govern the level of expression of mRNA and protein from genes. Although many software applications exist for network visualization, most require installation of stand-alone software, have a complex feature set that novice users find difficult to learn, or are specialized for large networks.  To address this, we have developed GRNsight, a web application and service that fills a niche for visualizing small- to medium-scale GRNs in a way that is simple and intuitive to use and adds value to the interpretation of GRN modeling results. GRNsight automatically lays out weighted or unweighted network graphs from an Excel workbook containing an adjacency matrix, a Simple Interaction Format (SIF) text file, or a GraphML (XML) file. GRNsight represents genes as nodes and regulatory connections as directed edges with colors, end markers, and thicknesses corresponding to weight values that represent the sign and magnitude of activation or repression of the target gene. GRNsight is written in JavaScript, and builds upon the D3.js visualization library to generate a force-directed graph that responds to changes in force graph parameter sliders. Manual node dragging can be used to refine the automated visualization. 

Since the release of GRNsight v1, feedback from peer review and the related GRNmap software modeling team has motivated improvements to the visual and analysis features. In GRNsight v2, new visual features include  automatic viewport size detection based on the user’s window size, and the addition of a control menu in the viewport. This control menu contains a zoom slider, D-pad control arrows, and centering button for enhanced graph manipulation. Additionally, GRNsight’s new bounding box expansion algorithm allows the force directed graph to fully relax when the viewport is adaptive, but restricts the graph to the viewport when the user chooses to do so. 

New analysis features include the ability to always or never show edge weight values, the ability to facilitate comparison of graphs by adjusting the normalization factor so that the thicknesses of the edges will be on the same scale, and the ability to set a custom threshold for edges that are colored grey. GRNsight's visualization features and automatic layout of unweighted and weighted network graphs enables the interpretation of weight parameters more easily than one could from an adjacency matrix alone, based on feedback from initial usability testing by the GRNmap modeling group and undergraduate biomathematical modeling course at Loyola Marymount University. GRNsight follows test-driven development software engineering best practices, with an exhaustive testing framework consisting of over 230 automated unit tests for quality control. GRNsight is in active development, closely interacting with the GRNmap modeling group. We plan to expand GRNsight’s feature set to compute and display graph statistics, provide different graph layout options, such as a hierarchical or block layout, as well as explore the effectiveness of alternate visualization paradigms for biologist users who are seeking visual insight into GRNs. The GRNsight application http://dondi.github.io/GRNsight/ and code https://github.com/dondi/GRNsight are available under the open source BSD license.
(554 words)

, with general applicability for other application domains
